\section{Satellite Communication Explained} \label{sec:satellite-communication-explained}

A satellite communication system has the target to send packets from a sender,
connected via a \ac{SNO}, to a receiver connected to a terrestrial ISP.

\begin{figure}[!ht]
	\centering
	\includegraphics[width=0.7\textwidth]{./chapters/2-background/img/satcom-structure-mohan.png}
	\caption{Schematics of Satellite Communication \cite{DBLP:conf/www/MohanFCBRMO24}.}
	\label{fig:sat-com-explained}
\end{figure}

The structure is illustrated in \Cref{fig:sat-com-explained}. Initially, there
is a sender connected to a satellite antenna provided by the specific \ac{SNO}.
The satellite antenna is also colloquially called "dishy". From the senders'
perspective, there is no different use compared to a traditional terrestrial
internet connection. The antenna sends packets to a satellite that might either
forward the packets to another satellite or directly send them to a nearby
\ac{GS} (also called \ac{PoP}). The \ac{GS} serves as an "entry point" to the
terrestrial internet. A \ac{GS} can forward packets through wired connections,
so they will reach the receiver eventually. \ac{GS}s have to be provided by the
\ac{SNO}. It is essential to have a dense \ac{GS} infrastructure. Fewer
\ac{GS}s can induce higher latencies, as more hops might be necessary.
Therefore, it is necessary to determine an advantageous positioning of \ac{GS}s
\cite{DBLP:conf/sigcomm/VasishtSC21}. For reference, one can get an overview of
current placements of Starlink and OneWeb \ac{GS}s on
\url{https://satellitemap.space}.

The technology of communicating with satellites will not be explained here.
Amongst others, it is described by Pratt~et~al.~\cite{pratt2019satellite}.

Theoretically, the propagation of data in satellite communication happens at
the speed of light. However, the latencies still vary a lot depending on the
choice of \ac{SNO}. Each of them provides a different satellite constellation.
One of the dominating factors is the altitude of the satellites in the
constellation. The higher the satellites are positioned, the more region a
single satellite covers. Therefore, fewer satellites are required to cover a
specific region, which reduces costs. Usually, \ac{SNO}s structure the earth's
surface in cells that receive coverage by at least one satellite. In the case
of Starlink, the world is divided in cells in the form of a hexagon with a
diameter of $\approx 24.13~km$. That translates to a single satellite being
able to cover approximately $379~km^2$ \cite{Pekhterev2021}.

Overall, one differentiates between \ac{GEO} (35'786 km altitude), \ac{MEO}
(2'000 - 35'786 km altitude), and \ac{LEO} (< 2'000 km altitude) satellite
constellations. One can see in \Cref{eq:geo-min-latency} and
\Cref{eq:starlink-min-latency} that this has a significant impact on the
latency.

\begin{equation}
	\frac{2 \cdot 35'786 km}{300'000 \frac{km}{s}} \approx 0.240 s
	\label{eq:geo-min-latency}
\end{equation}
\begin{equation}
	\frac{2 \cdot 550 km}{300'000 \frac{km}{s}} \approx 0.004 s
	\label{eq:starlink-min-latency}
\end{equation}

A \ac{GEO} constellation has a minimum latency of around 240 ms, as shown in
\Cref{eq:geo-min-latency}, assuming a packet needs to reach a satellite in
\ac{GEO} altitude and get back to the earth's surface. On the other hand,
\Cref{eq:starlink-min-latency} shows that a \ac{LEO} satellite constellation at
an altitude of 550 km (like in the case of Starlink) has a minimum latency of
only 4 ms. Research has shown that also in practice \ac{LEO} constellations are
superior compared to \ac{GEO} constellations, especially in terms of latency
\cite{DBLP:journals/pacmnet/RamanVCSZ23, Segan2020}. However, terrestrial
internet still performed better compared to \ac{LEO} constellations
\cite{DBLP:conf/www/MohanFCBRMO24, DBLP:conf/infocom/MaCZCML23}.

\subsection{Bent-Pipes} \label{sec:bent-pipes}

Ground stations are required for satellites to route packets to a receiver.
Depending on the location of the sender, the first satellite on the route might
have to forward packets to a different satellite (using an \ac{ISL}) in order
to reach a region with a \ac{GS}. Such a route is called "Bent-Pipe". Depending
on the number of hops in-between satellites, it is called an "n-hop-bent-pipe".
If the packet needs to be forwarded only once, it is a 1-hop-bent-pipe.

It is in question how bent-pipes influences the performance and behavior of a
networked satellite system. Research still discusses whether bent-pipes provide
a positive (\cite{DBLP:conf/hotnets/HauriBGS20}) or negative
(\cite{DBLP:conf/www/MohanFCBRMO24}) impact.

