\section{Measurement Platforms} \label{sec:measurement-platforms}

The following chapter describes the measurement platforms that were used to
measure and collect data.

\subsection{RIPE Atlas} \label{sec:ripe-atlas}

RIPE~Atlas is an open measurement platform to perform basic measurements on the
internet. It holds more than ten thousand probes that serve as starting points.
A probe is a machine that has the RIPE~Atlas probe software installed. A user
can request a probe for a measurement (e.g., a ping from a probe to a RIPE NCC
root server, i.e., *.root-servers.org).

RIPE Atlas offers the following basic types of measurements: Ping, Traceroute,
(Dis)connection~Events, DNS~Lookup, DNS~TLDs, HTTP, and TLS (SSL) GET
Certificate.

RIPE Atlas offers the possibility to start measurements via the web interface
or an API. While the web interface is sufficient for most use cases, it is also
quite limited. Using the API offers more possibilities (e.g., turning \ac{DoH}
queries into \ac{DoTLS} by adding \verb|"tls": true| into the definition of the
measurement).

Additionally, each registered probe performs measurements on a regular basis in
fixed time intervals (e.g., each probe performs every 240 seconds a ping
measurement against all RIPE NCC root servers). Those measurements are called
built-in measurements. They run always when the probe is connected to the RIPE
Atlas network. The built-in measurements are the ones used for the data of this
thesis within a specified time interval (usually January 2022 to June 2024).

Downloading the results of a measurement works by accessing the API. For
historical results, one can access the REST API that stores all results ever
measured. For more up-to-date results, one can use the Streaming API that sends
the most recent results to a subscribed socket. Theoretically, the API is
rate-limited, but we did not encounter problems even when bulk-downloading
larger datasets. Still, ethical crawling was used.

RIPE Atlas offered 150 Starlink probes (i.e., probes with ASN14593) at the time
of writing. \Cref{fig:probes-per-country} in the appendix shows the number of
probes per country. The originating country is determined by RIPE Atlas. As
most metrics rely on larger data amounts, the results in \Cref{sec:results}
will rely on countries with more probes.

\subsection{Cloudflare Radar} \label{sec:cloudflare-radar}

Cloudflare manages a vast amount of traffic on the internet. Initially, it
served the purpose of protecting servers from attacks. Today amongst others, it
also manages traffic, and sells data. In 2020, Cloudflare released data that
has been held internally. This new platform is \ac{CFR}. \ac{CFR} offers
various statistics on the internet ranging from security statistics over
latency measurements to bot ratios per country.

For the purpose of this thesis, we are mostly interested in the performance
measurements. \ac{CFR} offers performance measurements within their \ac{IQI}.
It is the collection of measurements performed through their
\href{https://speed.cloudflare.com/}{Internet Speed Test}
\cite{DavidBelson2023, CloudflareRadarDocsIQI}. As target, \ac{CFR} uses a
fixed set of Cloudflare servers.

\begin{takeaway}{Difference of RIPE Atlas and Cloudflare Radar}
	Measurements performed in \ac{CFR} and RIPE Atlas differentiate in the
	targeted servers (root servers vs. Cloudflare servers), the measurement
	probe (RIPE Atlas probe vs. browser), and the metric used (TLS vs. Time
	to First Byte). Cloudflare's servers are expected to have a better
	latency (they claim to be ~50ms away from 95 \% of the earth's
	population\footnote{State September 17, 2024}).
\end{takeaway}

\begin{figure}
	\begin{subfigure}[t]{0.48\textwidth}
		\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{./chapters/3-methodology/img/rootserver-locations.png}
		\caption{Locations of Root Servers (all *.root-servers.org
			together) \cite{rootservers092024}}
	\end{subfigure}
	\begin{subfigure}[t]{0.48\textwidth}
		\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{./chapters/3-methodology/img/cloudflare-datacenter-locations.png}
		\caption{Locations of Cloudflare Data Centers
			\cite{CloudflareGlobalNetwork2024}}
	\end{subfigure}
\end{figure}

\subsection{N2YO} \label{sec:n2yo}

N2YO is a platform collecting data about satellites in space. It is a data
integration platform collecting data from different platforms like Celestrak
and Space-Track.

For the purpose of this thesis, N2YO is used to find information on the
development of various satellite constellations and individual satellites.
Therefore, we want to determine the following information:

\begin{itemize}
	\item Satellite ID (also formerly called NoradID)
	\item Satellite Name
	\item Launch Date
	\item Decay Date (if applicable)
	\item Classification (if applicable)
\end{itemize}

Each satellite receives a unique ID (NoradID), centrally given to all
satellites launched. It is a continuous number starting at 1. The satellite
with ID~1 is the rocket body of Sputnik~1. Sputnik~1 itself holds ID~2.

The data is obtained by a web crawler that parses the HTML page and finds the
information needed. There is also the possibility of getting the data by API,
but the API is rate-limited. Parsing HTML is inefficient, but still a quicker
approach compared to using the API.
