\section{Related Work} \label{sec:related-work}

Network satellite operators exist for quite a while, starting the late 90s,
when Iridium launched their plans to deploy a mega satellite constellation
\cite{Chan2002}. Even if their plan did not work out, modern times face newer
technologies, giving other providers the possibility to achieve what Iridium
couldn't. With the rise of Starlink, OneWeb, Orbcomm, and others, research has
made steps to figuring out how "satellite internet" might work. In 2020,
research started to make their first steps by building the first mega
constellation simulators \cite{DBLP:conf/icnp/LaiLL20,
	DBLP:conf/imc/KassingBASS20}. However, research did not advance in this
direction as too many variables have to be taken into consideration. Therefore,
research turned to performing measurements on existing constellations.
Performance of networked satellite operators was presented in \cite{Segan2020, DBLP:conf/infocom/MaCZCML23,
	Pekhterev2021, DBLP:journals/pacmnet/RamanVCSZ23, DBLP:conf/leo-net/0001SCB23,
	DBLP:conf/imc/MichelTGB22, DBLP:conf/www/MohanFCBRMO24, Izhikevich2024,
	Omorogiuwa2024}.
However, it has to be noted that most measurements on existing systems were
performed on the Starlink constellation, due to low cost and high availability.
Resilience against catastrophes has been described by Stevens et al. \cite{DBLP:conf/pam/StevensIBD24}.
It is also worthwhile mentioning the influence of weather
\cite{DBLP:conf/tma/LaniewskiLMRA24, }, mobility
\cite{DBLP:journals/corr/abs-2403-13497}, and solar magnetic storms
\cite{DBLP:conf/infocom/MaCZCML23, Fang2022, Hapgood2022}. All these factors
have to be taken into consideration when performing routing
\cite{DBLP:conf/hotnets/Handley18, DBLP:journals/comcom/ZhangY22,
	DBLP:conf/pam/BhosaleSBG23}. This includes looking at \ac{ISLs}
\cite{DBLP:conf/hotnets/HauriBGS20, Stock2022}, the navigation of satellites
\cite{DBLP:conf/plans/KassasKKSHNKK23,DBLP:conf/iotbd/ShortenKR24}, and the positioning of \ac{GS}s \cite{DBLP:conf/sigcomm/VasishtSC21}.

In perfect conditions, this might supplement 6G deployment
\cite{DBLP:journals/cm/LinCCCHB21}. However, the most dominant problem is the
lack of knowledge about the functionality of Starlink. Therefore, people tried
to extract the firmware \cite{WoutersDumpingUserTerminalFirmware,
	QuarkslabsBlogUserTerminalFirmsware}.

Also, with the start of the war in Ukrained, people observed a new problem with
satellite networked being used in conflicts as they are independent of a
terrestrial infrastructure in the conflict zone \cite{Lab2024, Walsh2024,
	Abels2024}.
